DESIGN
IN THE
WORLD OF
BUSINESS.
The realities of the world impose severe constraints upon the design of
products. Up to now I have described the ideal case, assuming that
human-centered design principles could be followed in a vacuum; that is,
without attention to the real world of competition, costs, and schedules.
Conflicting requirements will come from different sources, all of which are
legitimate, all of which need to be resolved. Compromises must be made by all
involved.

Now it is time to examine the concerns outside of humancentered design that
affect the development of products. I start with the impact of competitive
forces that drive the introduction of extra features, often to excess: the
cause of the disease dubbed “featuritis,” whose major symptom is “creeping
featurism.” From there, I examine the drivers of change, starting with
technological drivers. When new technologies emerge, there is a temptation to
develop new products immediately. But the time for radically new products to
become successful is measured in years, decades, or in some instances
centuries. This causes me to examine the two forms of product innovation
relevant to design: incremental (less glamorous, but most common) and radical
(most glamorous, but rarely successful).

I conclude with reflections about the history and future prospects of this
book. The first edition of this book has had a long and fruitful life.
Twenty-five years is an amazingly long time for a book centered around
technology to have remained relevant. If this revised and expanded edition
lasts an equally long time, that means fifty years of The Design of Everyday
Things. In these next twenty-five years, what new developments will take place?
What will be the role of technology in our lives, for the future of books, and
what are the moral obligations of the design profession? And finally, for how
long will the principles in this book remain relevant? It should be no surprise
that I believe they will always be just as relevant as they were twenty-five
years ago, just as relevant as they are today. Why? The reason is simple. The
design of technology to fit human needs and capabilities is determined by the
psychology of people. Yes, technologies may change, but people stay the same.
Competitive Forces.
Today, manufacturers around the world compete with one another. The competitive
pressures are severe. After all, there are only a few basic ways by which a
manufacturer can compete: three of the most important being price, features,
and quality—unfortunately often in that order of importance. Speed is
important, lest some other company get ahead in the rush for market presence.
These pressures make it difficult to follow the full, iterative process of
continual product improvement. Even relatively stable home products, such as
automobiles, kitchen appliances, television sets, and computers, face the
multiple forces of a competitive market that encourage the introduction of
changes without sufficient testing and refinement.

Here is a simple, real example. I am working with a new startup company,
developing an innovative line of cooking equipment. The founders had some
unique ideas, pushing the technology of cooking far ahead of anything available
for homes. We did numerous field tests, built numerous prototypes, and engaged
a worldclass industrial designer. We modified the original product concept
several times, based on early feedback from potential users and advice from
industry experts. But just as we were about to commission the first production
of a few hand-tooled working prototypes that could be shown to potential
investors and customers (an expensive proposition for the small self-funded
company), other companies started displaying similar concepts in the trade
shows. What? Did they steal the ideas? No, it’s what is called the Zeitgeist, a
German word meaning “spirit of the time.” In other words, the time was ripe,
the ideas were “in the air.” The competition emerged even before we had
delivered our first product. What is a small, startup company to do? It doesn’t
have money to compete with the large companies. It has to modify its ideas to
keep ahead of the competition and come up with a demonstration that excites
potential customers and wows potential investors and, more importantly,
potential distributors of the product. It is the distributors who are the real
customers, not the people who eventually buy the product in stores and use it
in their homes. The example illustrates the real business pressures on
companies: the need for speed, the concern about costs, the competition that
may force the company to change its offerings, and the need to satisfy several
classes of customers—investors, distributors, and, of course, the people who
will actually use the product. Where should the company focus its limited
resources? More user studies? Faster development? New, unique features?

The same pressures that the startup faced also impact established companies.
But they have other pressures as well. Most products have a development cycle
of one to two years. In order to bring out a new model every year, the design
process for the new model has to have started even before the previous model
has been released to customers. Moreover, mechanisms for collecting and feeding
back the experiences of customers seldom exist. In an earlier era, there was
close coupling between designers and users. Today, they are separated by
barriers. Some companies prohibit designers from working with customers, a
bizarre and senseless restriction. Why would they do this? In part to prevent
leaks of the new developments to the competition, but also in part because
customers may  stop purchasing the current offerings if they are led to believe
that a new, more advanced item is soon to come. But even where there are no
such restrictions, the complexity of large organizations coupled with the
relentless pressure to finish the product makes this interaction difficult.
Remember Norman’s Law of Chapter 6: The day a product development process
starts, it is behind schedule and above budget.
FEATURITIS: A DEADLY TEMPTATION.
In every successful product there lurks the carrier of an insidious disease
called “featuritis,” with its main symptom being “creeping featurism.” The
disease seems to have been first identified and named in 1976, but its origins
probably go back to the earliest technologies, buried far back in the eons
prior to the dawn of history. It seems unavoidable, with no known prevention.
Let me explain.

Suppose we follow all the principles in this book for a wonderful,
human-centered product. It obeys all design principles. It overcomes people’s
problems and fulfills some important needs. It is attractive and easy to use
and understand. As a result, suppose the product is successful: many people buy
it and tell their friends to buy it. What could be wrong with this?

The problem is that after the product has been available for a while, a number
of factors inevitably appear, pushing the company toward the addition of new
features—toward creeping featurism. These factors include: 

Existing customers like the product, but express a wish for more features,
more functions, more capability.

A competing company adds new features to its products, producing competitive
pressures to match that offering, but to do even more in order to get ahead
of the competition.

Customers are satisfied, but sales are declining because the market is
saturated: everyone who wants the product already has it. Time to add
wonderful enhancements that will cause people to want the new model, to
upgrade.

Featuritis is highly infectious. New products are invariably more complex, more
powerful, and different in size than the first release of a product. You can
see that tension playing out in music players, mobile phones, and computers,
especially on smart phones, tablets, and pads. Portable devices get smaller and
smaller with each release, despite the addition of more and more features
(making them ever more difficult to operate). Some products, such as
automobiles, home refrigerators, television sets, and kitchen stoves, also
increase in complexity with each release, getting larger and more powerful.

But whether the products get larger or smaller, each new edition invariably has
more features than the previous one. Featuritis is an insidious disease,
difficult to eradicate, impossible to vaccinate against. It is easy for
marketing pressures to insist upon the addition of new features, but there is
no call—or for that matter, budget—to get rid of old, unneeded ones.

How do you know when you have encountered featuritis? By its major symptom:
creeping featurism. Want an example? Look at Figure 7.1, which illustrates the
changes that have overcome the simple Lego motorcycle since my first encounter
with it for the first edition of this book. The original motorcycle (Figure 4.1
and Figure 7.1A) had only fifteen components and could be put together without
any instructions: it had sufficient constraints that every piece had a unique
location and orientation. But now, as Figure 7.1B shows, the same motorcycle
has become bloated, with twenty-nine pieces. I needed instructions.

Creeping featurism is the tendency to add to the number of features of a
product, often extending the number beyond all reason. There is no way that a
product can remain usable and understandable by the time it has all of those
special-purpose features that have been added in over time.

In her book Different, Harvard professor Youngme Moon argues that it is this
attempt to match the competition that causes all products to be the same. When
companies try to increase sales by matching every feature of their competitors,
they end up hurting themselves. After all, when products from two companies
match feature by feature, there is no longer any reason for a customer to
prefer one over another. This is competition-driven design. Unfortunately, the
mind-set of matching the competitor’s list of features pervades many
organizations. Even if the first versions of a product are well done,
human-centered, and focused upon real needs, it is the rare organization that
is content to let a good product stay untouched.

Most companies compare features with their competition to determine where they
are weak, so they can strengthen those areas. Wrong, argues Moon. A better
strategy is to concentrate on areas where they are stronger and to strengthen
them even more. Then focus all marketing and advertisements to point out the
strong points. This causes the product to stand out from the mindless herd. As
for the weaknesses, ignore the irrelevant ones, says Moon. The lesson is
simple: don’t follow blindly; focus on strengths, not weaknesses. If the
product has real strengths, it can afford to just be “good enough” in the other
areas.

Good design requires stepping back from competitive pressures and ensuring that
the entire product be consistent, coherent, and understandable. This stance
requires the leadership of the company to withstand the marketing forces that
keep begging to add this feature or that, each thought to be essential for some
market segment. The best products come from ignoring these competing voices and
instead focusing on the true needs of the people who use the product.

Jeff Bezos, the founder and CEO of Amazon.com, calls his approach “customer
obsessed.” Everything is focused upon the requirements of Amazon’s customers.
The competition is ignored, the traditional marketing requirements are ignored.
The focus is on simple, customer-driven questions: what do the customers want;
how can their needs best be satisfied; what can be done better to enhance
customer service and customer value? Focus on the customer, Bezos argues, and
the rest takes care of itself. Many companies claim to aspire to this
philosophy, but few are able to follow it. Usually it is only possible where
the head of the company, the CEO, is also the founder. Once the company passes
control to others, especially those who follow the traditional MBA dictum of
putting profit above customer concerns, the story goes downhill. Profits may
indeed increase in the short term, but eventually the product quality
deteriorates to the point where customers desert. Quality only comes about by
continual focus on, and attention to, the people who matter: customers.
New Technologies Force Change.
Today, we have new requirements. We now need to type on small, portable devices
that don’t have room for a full keyboard. Touchand gesture-sensitive screens
allow a new form of typing. We can bypass typing altogether through handwriting
recognition and speech understanding.

Consider the four products shown in Figure 7.2. Their appearance and methods of
operations changed radically in their century of existence. Early telephones,
such as the one in Figure 7.2A, did not have keyboards: a human operator
intervened to make the connections. Even when operators were first replaced by
automatic switching systems, the “keyboard” was a rotary dial with ten holes,
one for each digit. When the dial was replaced with pushbutton keys, it
suffered a slight case of featuritis: the ten positions of the dial were
replaced with twelve keys: the ten digits plus * and #.

But much more interesting is the merger of devices. The human computer gave
rise to laptops, small portable computers. The telephone moved to small,
portable cellular phones (called mobiles in much of the world). Smart phones
had large, touch-sensitive screens, operated by gesture. Soon computers merged
into tablets, as did cell phones. Cameras merged with cell phones. Today,
talking, video conferences, writing, photography (both still and video), and
collaborative interaction of all sorts are increasingly  being done by one
single device, available with a large variety of screen sizes, computational
power, and portability. It doesn’t make sense to call them computers, phones,
or cameras: we need a new name. Let’s call them “smart screens.” In the
twenty-second century, will we still have phones? I predict that although we
will still talk with one another over a distance, we will not have any device
called a telephone.

As the pressures for larger screens forced the demise of physical keyboards
(despite the attempt to make tiny keyboards, operated with single fingers or
thumbs), the keyboards were displayed on the screen whenever needed, each
letter tapped one at a time. This is slow, even when the system tries to
predict the word being typed so that keying can stop as soon as the correct
word shows up. Several systems were soon developed that allowed the finger or
stylus to trace a path among the letters of the word: word-gesture systems. The
gestures were sufficiently different from one another that it wasn’t even
necessary to touch all the letters—it only mattered that the pattern generated
by the approximation to the correct path was close enough to the desired one.
This turns out to be a fast and easy way to type (Figure 7.2D).

With gesture-based systems, a major rethinking is possible. Why keep the
letters in the same QWERTY arrangement? The pattern generation would be even
faster if letters were rearranged to maximize speed when using a single finger
or stylus to trace out the letters. Good idea, but when one of the pioneers in
developing this technique, Shumin Zhai, then at IBM, tried it, he ran into the
legacy problem. People knew QWERTY and balked at having to learn a different
organization. Today, the word-gesture method of typing is widely used, but with
QWERTY keyboards (as in Figure 7.2D).

Technology changes the way we do things, but fundamental needs remain
unchanged. The need for getting thoughts written down, for telling stories,
doing critical reviews, or writing fiction and nonfiction will remain. Some
will be written using traditional keyboards, even on new technological devices,
because the keyboard still remains the fastest way to enter words into a
system, whether it be paper or electronic, physical or virtual. Some people
will prefer to speak their ideas, dictating them. But spoken words are still
likely to be turned into printed words (even if the print is simply on a
display device), because reading is far faster and superior to listening.
Reading can be done quickly: it is possible to read around three hundred words
per minute and to skim, jumping ahead and back, effectively acquiring
information at rates in the thousands of words per minute. Listening is slow
and serial, usually at around sixty words per minute, and although this rate
can be doubled or tripled with speech compression technologies and training, it
is still slower than reading and not easy to skim. But the new media and new
technologies will supplement the old, so that writing will no longer dominate
as much as it did in the past, when it was the only medium widely available.
Now that anyone can type and dictate, take photographs and videos, draw
animated scenes, and creatively produce experiences that in the twentieth
century required huge amounts of technology and large crews of specialized
workers, the types of devices that allow us to do these tasks and the ways they
are controlled will proliferate.

The role of writing in civilization has changed over its five thousand years of
existence. Today, writing has become increasingly common, although increasingly
as short, informal messages. We now communicate using a wide variety of media:
voice, video, handwriting, and typing, sometimes with all ten fingers,
sometimes just with the thumbs, and sometimes by gestures. Over time, the ways
by which we interact and communicate change with technology. But because the
fundamental psychology of human beings will remain unchanged, the design rules
in this book will still apply.

Of course, it isn’t just communication and writing that has changed.
Technological change has impacted every sphere of our lives, from the way
education is conducted, to medicine, foods, clothing, and transportation. We
now can manufacture things at home, using 3-D printers. We can play games with
partners around the world. Cars are capable of driving themselves, and their
engines have changed from internal combustion to an assortment of  pure
electric and hybrids. Name an industry or an activity and if it hasn’t already
been transformed by new technologies, it will be. Technology is a powerful
driver for change. Sometimes for the better, sometimes for the worse. Sometimes
to fulfill important needs, and sometimes simply because the technology makes
the change possible.
